MATEO TORREZ 12:22 a.m Death-Cast is calling with the warning of a lifetime - I'm going to die today.
"warning" is too strong a word since warnings suggest something can be avoided, like a car honking at someone who's crossing the street when it isn't their light, giving them the chance to step back; this is more of a heads up.
"Hello, I'm calling from Death-Cast. I'm Andrea. You there, Timothy?"
"And Timothy, on behalf of everyone here at Death-Cast, we are so sorry to lose you. Live this day to the fullest, okay?" "I'm Mateo"
I collapse back onto the floor, thinking about how it's do or die now. Not even that. Do, and then die.
I write thank-you notes for my neighbors in 4F and 4A, telling them it's my End Day. With Dad in the hospital, Elliot in 4F has been checking in on me, bringing me dinner, especially since our stove has been busted for the past week after I tried making Dad's empanadas
It's 1:00 a.m. I can't believe I'm never returning to my bedroom.I unlock the front door, turn the knob, and pull the door open.
"Maybe it was a mistake," Malcolm says. My phone rings again. Malcolm stays shut.
I don't know how Keith died. I don't know if Turbo made it out alive or if he died with Keith. I don't know what would've been preferred for Keith or Turbo.
The damage is done—will be done. Today is my End Day, a straight-up Rufus Armageddon. I don't know how this is gonna go down.
"Loyal to the end." The end. That shuts us up.
I check the time: 1:30. There's still time for the other Plutos to get the alert. I'm not wishing it on them, but maybe I won't have to die alone. Or maybe that's how it has to be.
I have to visit Dad, even if he's unconscious. He has to know I made my way to him before I died.
I have to do better. Everyone wanted so much more out of me, myself included. I have to honor this. It's my last day to do so. Here Lies Mateo: He Lived for Everyone. I hit Submit.
"We should do the funeral," Tagoe says. "But take your time. It's your day. Sorry, it's not your day, it's not like a birthday, it's the opposite." He twitches. "I'm gonna get everyone in here." He steps.
"You were- you are our bro, Roof. This is bullshit. Total fucking bullshit." His head hangs low as he picks at the cuticles on his left hand. "They should take me instead." "Don't say that. Seriously, shut up."
I don't know where I'm going, but I keep going. I lived through my funeral, but I wish I was already dead.
I keep getting dicked out of proper goodbyes. No final hug with my family, no final hug with the Plutos. It's not even the goodbyes, man, it's not getting to thank everyone for all they did for me.
No matter how we choose to live, we both die at the end.
and finally he cries, these loud, stuttering sobs, not because he'll now have a criminal record, not because he's scared to go to the police station, not even because Rufus is dying, but because the biggest crime of all tonight was not being able to hug his best friend goodbye.
Yo, Mateo is too good.
Thank you for everything, Dad. I'll be brave, and I'll be okay. I love you from here to there. Mateo
I look both ways before crossing the street.
DELILAH GREY 5:00 a.m. Death-Cast called Delilah Grey at 2:52 a.m. to tell her she's going to die today, but she's sure it's not true.
"This isn't about karma. I'm not trying to rack up I'm-a-Good-Person points."
"I think we made his day by not pretending he's invisible. Thanks for seeing him with me."
"Leaving means dying," I say. "Nah. Leaving means living before you die. Let's bounce."
Who put down ten dollars I'd find myself on Instagram on my End Day? Because you're now ten dollars richer.
"I know how to cross the street," I say. "I've sort of been walking my entire life."
"I get it. But walking? I got this."
the deeper we go into the park, the quieter I get because of pure wonder, especially as we stumble onto a bronze sculpture of characters from Alice in Wonderland.
I believe him. He's not monstrous. Monsters don't come to your home to help you live; they trap you in your bed and eat you alive.
"Okay. I've signed away my right to bitch if I die."
Mateo won't live a long life, which is bullshit because he's the greatest soul in this universe, but he'll live a long day. He can die at 11:59 p.m., but not a minute before.
"We never act," Mateo says. "Only react once we realize the clock is ticking."
My Last Friend is here for the long run.
"My afterlife is like a home theater where you can re-watch your entire life from start to finish. And let's say my mother invited me into her theater—I could watch her life. I just hope someone knows what parts should fade to black so I'm not scarred my entire afterlife.
"You sold me on fate," Rufus says. "Finish telling me about your afterlife." I do.
Twelve hours ago I received the phone call telling me I'm going to die today, and I'm more alive now than I was then.
We go inside the Open Bookstore. I love how the store name is hopeful.
Rufus stops and smiles. "Nah, I liked that. Thanks for that story, Super Mateo." "It's actually Mega Master Mateo Man. Get it right, sidekick."
I slow down as we turn in to Althea Park. Mateo's hands slip off my shoulders and my bike is immediately lighter. I brake.
It's a game called Traveler I used to play with Olivia. Make up a story about another passenger, where they're going and who they are.
In the future, Rufus is a travel blogger and I'm an architect. We have tattoos we got together. We've gone to so many concerts he can't keep them straight in his head. I almost wish we weren't so creative in this moment, because these fake memories of friendship feel incredible.
Life isn't meant to be lived alone. Neither are End Days.Seeing Lidia will be a huge risk, but it's one I want to take.
"Why can't we have a chance?" I ask Rufus. "A chance at what?" He's looking around, taking pictures of the arena and the lines. "A chance at another chance," I say.
For all the mouth I ran about being brave, I'm not sure about this jump.
MATEO 5:14 p.m. This day has some miracles.
Death-Cast called Howie Maldonado at 2:37 a.m. to tell him he's going to die today. His 2.3 million Twitter followers are taking it the hardest.
I kiss the guy who brought me to life on the day we're going to die.
If Death wanted her, Death had two shots. Delilah and Death won't be meeting today.
Rufus's smile is brighter. "The Plutos are here."
I wanna keep holding Mateo's hand, but I gotta hug my people.
The Plutos shake hands with Mateo and Lidia. Solar systems are colliding.
"Dance with me." I thought we were dancing already. "Am I doing it wrong?" "You're great. I meant a slow dance."
"I wish we had more time... I wanna ride bikes through empty streets and spend a hundred dollars at an arcade and take the Staten Island ferry just to introduce you to my favorite snow cones."
I find a bold orange marker that works and I tiptoe to reach this blank space where I write: MATEO WAS HERE AND LIDIA WAS BY HIS SIDE, AS ALWAYS.
This stampede is impossible to get through and I can't reach Rufus and I'm not going to be able to touch him again while he's still alive.
I can't be stupid. I can't be a hero.
"My Last Message would be to find your people. And to treat each day like a lifetime."
"Are you criticizing how I saved your life?"
Rufus squeezes my hand. "Take me home, Mateo."
THE PLUTOS 6:33 p.m. Death-Cast did not call these three Plutos because they aren't dying today, but their fourth did receive the alert and that's just as devastating.
Entire lives aren't lessons, but there are lessons in lives.
You may be born into a family, but you walk into friendships. Some you'll discover you should put behind you. Others are worth every risk.
The three friends hug, a planet missing from their Pluto Solar System—but never forgotten
I don't stop taking photos of this awesome, unrecognizable Mateo.
"Get ready. This is a once-in-a-lifetime performance." I look over my shoulder. "Feeling special yet?"
I turn during a quick break and catch Rufus filming me on his phone. I smile his way.
"You're right, Mateo Torrez." "It happens every now and again, Rufus Emeterio."
"This is our safe space, our little island." Rufus traces an invisible circle around us. "We aren't moving from here. We can't die if we don't move. You got me?"
"I would've loved you if we had more time."
If we had our entire lives ahead of us I bet you'd get tired of me telling you how much I love you because I'm positive that's the path we were heading on. But because we're about to die, I want to say it as many times as I want-I love you, I love you, I love you, I love you.
"Yo. You know damn well I love you too." Man, it actually hurts how much I mean this.
Two dudes meet. They fall for each other. They die.
Two dudes met. They fell in love. They lived. That's our story.
I wake up feeling invincible. I don't check the time because I don't want anything to shatter my survivor spirit. In my head, I'm already in another day.
When I switch on the burner, my chest sinks with regret. Even when you know death is coming, the blaze of it all is still sudden.
RUFUS 8:47 p.m. I wake up choking on smoke.
"Wake up, Mateo, wake up, wake up," I beg. "Why'd you get out of bed... We, we said we wouldn't get out of..." He shouldn't have gotten out of bed and he shouldn't have ditched me in that home of fire and smoke.
"Come on, Mateo, it's me, Roof. You hear me, right? It's Roof. Wake up now. Please wake up."
My heart is burning and I'm so pissed off at Mateo for dying before me.
Whatever happens to me, scatter me at Althea. Orbit each other so damn hard. I love you.
No, even if he didn't die a hero's death, he died a hero. Mateo Torrez definitely saved me.
"I know he can't hear, but I wanna tell him how brave his son was," Rufus says. Was. Mateo is now a was. "I can hear you," Lidia says. "Please tell me first."
The last photo I'm throwing up on Instagram is the one of me with my Last Friend. It's the one we took in his bedroom where I'm wearing his glasses and he's squinting and we're smiling because we won some happiness before I lost him.
I gotta meet the man who raised Mateo into the dude I fell in love with in less than a day.
"I'm Rufus and I was Mateo's Last Friend. I managed to get him out of the house, I don't know if he told you that. He was really brave."
I'm happy too. Even now when I'm destroyed again, Mateo repaired me. I play the video, which I could listen to on loop.
Victor gets in his car and speeds to Althea.
I'm Rufus Emeterio. I was Mateo's Last Friend. He was mad brave on his End Day.
I'm really happy your son reached out to me on what could've been the worst day ever. Sorry for your loss
RUFUS 10:36 p.m. The hourglass is almost out of sand.
I throw on my headphones and watch the video of Mateo singing to me. I see Althea Park in the distance, my place of great change.
I return my attention to the video, his voice blasting in my ears. I cross the street without an arm to hold me back.
Maybe it's better to have gotten it right and been happy for one day instead of living a lifetime of wrongs.
There has to be more to life than just imagining a future for yourself. I can't just wish for the future; I have to take risks to create it.
I always wanted to stumble into someone like you.
I wasted all those yesterdays and am completely out of tomorrows.
I'll be gone before I can adjust to my mortality
It has been both my sanctuary and my prison and for once I need to go breathe in the outside air instead of tearing through it to get from Point A to Point B.
Maybe the call telling me I'm about to lose my life just saved his.
Then again, I don't know if it's sadder to die alone or in the company of someone who not only doesn't mean anything to you, but also probably doesn't care much for you either.
There's graffiti of two silhouettes on the wall with the air pumps for bike tires. The silhouettes are both shaped like the dude on the men's bathroom sign. In orange spray paint it says: The Last Friend App.
"I miss when I was so young I didn't know to be afraid of death. I even miss yesterday when I was paranoid and not actually dying."
You're positive about a movie theater in the afterlife but not if you'll have your glasses? Seems like an oversight in your heavenly blueprint
I look like I've just woken up. Rufus wearing my glasses is a welcome intimacy, like we've known each other for so long that this kind of silliness comes easily to us.
We remain pressed together as more people flood the dance floor. Yesterday Mateo would've found this claustrophobic, but now? Don't ever move me. 
"We did a lot of living today."
"How do you know when love is love?"
Please promise me you won't go dying before me. I can't see that.
Coming back as a tree would be pretty chill, like I'm growing up in Althea Park again
Zoe hopes Gabriella continues befriending Deckers when she can.
Crossing the street is pretty instinctive at this point. If there are no cars, you go. If there are cars coming toward you, you don't go—or you go really quickly.
This is Penny's beginning. And one day she'll find herself on the terrible end of a Death-Cast call and it sucks how we're all being raised to die.
She leans over, picks up Penny, and holds her out to me. "Penny for your thoughts?"
"I sometimes forget their voices," I say.
The look on Rufus's face will haunt Tagoe far longer than any of the gore he's seen in his favorite slasher films.
"We were going to die before we knew each other," Mateo says.
I can't trust this day.
Final Thoughts: It's about time. I've made mistakes, but I'm gonna go out right
I could've really gone for one last Pluto Solar System group hug.
I love Lidia in all her forms.